Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Venue Swicker Office.
The date is 25th October 2014.
The interviewees are Sally Verrill and Jane Bellamy.
Jane, would you please spell your name for the record?
Jane A-M-E Jane Bellamy V-E-L-L-A-M-Y.
Over to you Sally.
Sally S-A-L-L-Y Verrill V-A-R-R-A-L-L.
Thank you very much indeed.
When did you first come across the Cardiff Mass Carnival?
I first came across the Carnival in the Christopher 500 years of resistance, Columbus.
I just happened to be in town just wandering around and this just came up.
Man real business.
And along I just came to the haze and just saw this just colour and noise that just came straight
up the road to the haze and I was just blown over actually by the whole thing, the spectacle of it
and you know these huge, huge structures.
You know I think one of them was my best was the famous, was the in the boats, all the boats,
all the people in the boats, I thought that was fantastic and just the fact that you know you
could use that and people were moving with it and just and I was moving with it as well so
that was my first definitely my first experience of carnival and then from there I thought I got
to get involved with this so joined the the Samba band and started clicking away on the old
what they called?
Go Go Bells?
Go Go Bells that's the one.
It's okay.
Go Go Bells. Go Go Bells were the first thing I did yes every Sunday evening and that's how I started.
Yes it was amazing.
How about you Sally what was your first point of contact?
I mean it's almost a shared experience definitely by being a spectator and witnessing
and seeing it and like Jane said that the right world is spectacle there
but and I feel like my memory is failing me and I don't know what order this all happened in
but because I came to work at Rubicon I was very aware then and I and because I came to
meet with Jane I was very aware of the carnival but I also got involved with dancing with
Sally McLennan and my Adrian ran the Samba band and she set up a dance group for it
and I really can't remember in what order it all happened but I was a participant of one of the
carnivals and I think...
Was the last one called the Tarzan Angels or something like that?
Oh yeah that was another one but yeah that's interesting yeah.
Right.
I was dancing with June and Sally and Tracy and myself and then Adrian did some music for us as
well yes yeah so that was kind of an offshoot actually yeah and that was just not very much
about dancing in the street and for festivals but yeah no so I was a dancer with Sally's group
and we danced with the Samba band and so I was a participant in the carnival soon after as well
before becoming involved in the making of it but yeah for me it's just yes I think it's something
and I think I'm quite selfish about this if you see something like that you want to be in it
rather than observing it and so I was delighted when I became involved in it yeah.
You've both been I think working as a team really wasn't it as animators actually
trying to help put the bullet in the gun of actually yes I mean you know nine tenths of the
iceberg is the making of costumes but if on you know come the big day come the day of actually
showing the work if the costumes aren't kinetic if the dance groups don't dance
with joy then we have no carnival so 1994 at Kittays Community Center you'd have been part
of the teams then I think I was there as I came in as part of the team then that was when I first
came that was my first year yes it was yeah and of course that we wouldn't have had a specific
dance space for it wasn't a specific dance space and it was basically just right everybody wants
to move we're doing it here now at this point in time and then we had maybe a couple of drummers
and that was Chris was there that time as well Chris Chris yes that's right and we just
just gathered everybody together who wanted to dance whether they were going to be dancers in
or not they would all have to move at some point the music and we just did these huge I remember
huge sessions it was quite impressive and we just took over the space basically and then everyone
making as it goes to the next space or people making were around the space and yeah that first
year was quite um having seen hundred years of resistance be 500 years of resistance before
in the year before it was almost like you've gone part of it but also it's this whole thing
about getting people participating and that's what I enjoyed about it you know just encouraging
people who perhaps haven't moved at all just to step yeah do a few steps and um and feel
comfortable doing it and just letting themselves go because that I mean obviously carnival that's
what it's about it's expressing yourself through music and being somebody else maybe for that day
and if you can help them move within their costume to do that then that's
yeah that would be a good thing yeah I also have memories of almost collecting people
and it's it's that idea of yes there would be advertised a dance workshop would be going on
but actually that to me isn't part of what carnival's about it's not this separate thing
and so actually people would be in the space making joining some people would be dropping in
off of the street literally and all dropping out actually became part of it and it was it was almost
processional in the making you do they disappear they come back so yeah and again that's what's so
lovely about it it isn't about this advertised thing you come and you do this actually one minute
you're making one minute you're joining in and yeah there's a fluidity about it well there was
we talk a lot about access and being inclusive it seems to be that bubble it you know had no
there's no membrane for people to you know provided they could actually come through the door
yeah they were welcoming and it used to because on I think that's just it and it was all the mass
camps were in the summer and in those lovely moments when it is sunny in Cardiff I think it
used to spill out didn't it yeah it wasn't just it was spill outside yes yeah yeah but I've got
memories as well as sometimes the workshops literally happening outside they did yeah yeah
I was especially when chap today was a lot outside and and it's and also the fact that you know
families would come together and let you get a family dancing especially I mean each kind of
was different because of the different people that took part in it but quite often there was
lots of that's what I enjoyed was the family sessions where you'd have everybody have mum dad
grandma if you might be you never know granddad not many grand dads but you know you know but
everybody just having a go that's what I enjoyed about that's quite a lot of memories especially
when we had our children as well I was just about to say our children came around yeah yeah
because we had them yeah they were really young weren't they at that time and they used to get
I mean they still remember it now so they wake up screaming
no they do they do remember it and they always remember it oh you know remember I used to because
I always thought well am I dragging them along or they do they want to come along or it's mum
doing what she does and getting embarrassed by me and things like that but no they've got really
positive memories and and I think um yeah definitely well for me and it also it forms part of my only
memories of their life yes it really does and because the first carnival I was in because I
was too attached to my children I Laurie was on my back in a in a holder so I danced the whole thing
and made me sorry can we get this now I um went away on holiday and then discovered I was pregnant
with Finn and then he came along to the next carnival and that's when Natasha looked at so
Natasha used to look after Finn because it was it wasn't just you know you were there all the time
you were there all the time so you'd have someone to look after them or just to give an eye on them
and we're doing your bit yeah we were looking at photographs recently because Laurie the one
that was on my back is now 22 and and he had remembered his experience and we were getting
out photographs to show his girlfriend and we found photographs of him with really long hair
and being a monkey did he have a red fez on no no some of the monkeys did yes no he didn't
no he didn't he had long blonde hair and a tail and a monkey face yeah yeah yeah so I was thinking
but it is but I think that's what Jane just said it isn't just about it's a whole family
experience and it is it connects with people and brings out something from I think I really do
the I mean obviously uh parading has been a constant over the past 25 years there's always
been a you know a parading element and the route has changed over the years and the staging again
has changed over the 25 years but we've just watched a video looking at an ending which went
onto the haze for a bit of a party but that happened on the steps of the National Museum
of Wales before they put in the handrails which certainly facilitate access for those
with mobility problems but actually took away our stage from us um looking at the video I mean
the groups do look highly choreographed I mean you were clearly involved in all that I mean I can
remember you coming through coming on walkthroughs and the rest of it and we'd be there certainly I
my mind's like the two of you were pointing and and sort of doing some steps up here and
on this podium well the following will be happening is it is this all true have I made it all up
I think there was a whole when we started there was a parading and then with it was a vision I
think of Amaru really thinking about this idea of having carnival theatre telling a story telling
a story and and I think that was part of it so you had the element which was moving around but
actually it was it was thinking about what what were those costumes about what was underlying
what message what what was the theme and underneath it and trying to to replicate that in a sort of a
theatre theatre context I suppose but yeah and to some extent it it worked and then to other
extents everything went into chaos so so I mean the idea so it was like so I don't know whether
we actually got to that point where it it sort of found a sort of a you know a space a happy
yeah happy middle ground and maybe maybe it's something still to be explored I don't know
it's interesting because Jane used the absolute word for me that something came out of the chaos
but and I actually think for us we have a picture in our head but not not a definite it wasn't about
people being having to be there and I think just in watching back actually is what I saw going on
there's a lot of connecting visually with people and then having that moment of dancing with them
and there was a very very loose structure and selfishly I kind of remember that I was doing a
water section and so we literally used that idea like you said earlier the fluidity will allow it
to be what it is and we had moments of spiralling like you know the idea of water and waves and
fall them back but I can remember the eco I definitely remember the eco mass because there
was that I think that's when it came in the height of putting together some kind of a story it was a
very complex story to it so I remember Amara had it in his head what it was going to be and I had
little snippets of it and then all of a sudden he said right Jane okay so we know what we're
going to do now I'm going yes and he said because I'm going to go on the stage now and drum so I had
no clue what was going on I had little snippets and then I'm trying to herd people on and then
people coming off and then people going on and actually not wanting to leave the space so I think
oh there we are that's it that's where they are that's fine that's okay you didn't get out of
with and drive them off the steps or something no exactly because they were right in the zone
Amara was in the zone and everybody's in the zone so that was fine but the idea behind it the
actual story was very very and maybe that's okay then maybe that's just what it needs to be
you know it doesn't need to be any more than that so that I think that was the the most ambitious
one I'm sure that was most ambitious one I want to think I'm just trying to give some of the other
ones but that was when we had the stage as well didn't we we had the steps in the stage and we
had a flat back lorry because we wanted we needed to we needed to extend it because we were trying
harder to tell whether to be some received meaning yes yeah and I think you know I think it it works
I you know but but do you know it's your perception of what this thing would be we don't I just think
I think that was what's the main thing what what's the performance going to be like and I don't think
it's about taking away the fact that there was a narrative there but actually the whole carnival is
visual is a spectacle and people watching they make up their own stories and actually as a
participant in it you make up your own story and especially when you're in that moment you really
do yes I've got to say that takes me off on another journey we were really lucky to do workshops with
that guy from Billy's yes and well I will not even say workshops we were kind of experiences I think
that's the first time I felt like I was in a trance totally hypnotized because I think we danced in a
room non-stop for about three hours and yes it was here it was yeah and I actually came out of it
and felt like I had been transported into another space and it was amazing and and that is almost
something I wanted to be able to share with people allow yourself just to just to be there
and we've been using I've been using it ever since all that material I've been using ever since all
that sort of those traditions the those things he imparted on us which was to do with the music as
well in the rhythms and and yes no that was an that was a really and I don't do this easily but
it's actually getting in touch with your spiritual self and you did he did we were allowed to do that
in that moment and yeah transcending moment there we are if you had a I mean obviously it's a visual
feast carnival but if you had to pick your most striking costume may not be one that you wore
yourself may not even be one that you well you probably wrapped everything when you were there
what can yes what have you just come to your mind going down the street I mean oh going down the
street I the one that I really remember is when there was the opening for the world cup
that was I it was yeah I I just was there and there was all these people from different countries
or it was a South Africa and different places it was Argentina was the first one wasn't it
but there was lots of people there on the side I just remember just going dancing with was I what
I can't remember what I was wearing a load of daffodils yeah when we woke up we were going to be
loaded daffodils yeah there's bound to be that yeah yeah no no I think we were trying to side with subvert
stereotypes I hasten to act you know that was our plan but we were all coming down and just seeing
everybody coming down because as you came down past the castle there's a slight slope isn't there
and you could see everybody in front of you and everybody behind you you could just see everything
and it was just quite impressive I thought I thought that was a really strong memory most
definitely just because you know different audience is the dancing daft I think was in red actually
ah I know the picture of which you speak yes styrofoam yeah I think there's also something
about the scale though because there are there were some beautiful magnificent huge costumes
and to a certain extent actually the costume was the choreography of it because actually the person
within it just had to shift this thing along the street but then you had the contrast of the people
we're talking about earlier they're just body painted and actually that allowed for the freedom
of movement so it's just exactly it's almost like that they became the dancing costume themselves
and for me that's one of the strong memories actually yes yeah different kind of traditions
different different points of access different points of ways of expressing yourself really I
suppose variety it's got to be good it's got to be good I think the other the other memories is
is and that must be the same year in Swansea yeah the very first Swansea that was very special
I think it's special because of the place I don't know it just um yeah that was very special I think
it was very good that one yeah very uh I can't put my finger on why it was because it opened the door
in Swansea I think probably probably they've been dying out for some kind of public celebration
you know we showed them what they were capable of so enthusiastic they were so
open to everything and and uh yeah that was great
can I thank you both for your contribution those years ago and your eloquence now Sally and Jane
thank you very much indeed